[VPD-893]: Add DeviationBoundedOracle and Protection Mode documentation (#349)
VenusProtocol/venus-protocol-documentation: risk/protection-mode.md

# Protection Mode

### Overview

> Venus already protects every market with the [Resilient Oracle](resilient-price-oracle.md), which validates prices across multiple independent sources before any value is used by the protocol. Protection Mode adds a second layer on top of that foundation for low-liquidity collateral assets: when a sudden price move on an asset looks like manipulation, Protection Mode activates and switches its borrow-capacity price to a conservative, manipulation-resistant value, while liquidations continue to use real-time spot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Venus already protects every market with the [Resilient Oracle](resilient-price-oracle.md), which validates prices across multiple independent sources before any value is used by the protocol. Protection Mode adds a second layer on top of that foundation for whitelisted assets prone to manipulation (typically low-liquidity tokens, used as either collateral or borrow asset): when a sudden price move on an asset looks like manipulation, Protection Mode activates and switches its borrow-capacity price to a conservative, manipulation-resistant value, while liquidations continue to use real-time spot.
```

> The risk it mitigates is well-known on lending protocols. An attacker can pump the price of a low-liquidity token they hold as collateral, borrow far more than the token's real value warrants, and exit before the protocol can recover — leaving the protocol holding collateral worth a fraction of the outstanding debt, bad debt that socializes losses across all lenders. The mirror attack on the debt side (crashing the spot price of a borrowed asset to repay cheaply) has the same structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The risk it mitigates is well-known on lending protocols. An attacker can pump the price of a low-liquidity token they hold as collateral, borrow far more than the token's real value warrants, and exit before the protocol can recover — leaving the protocol holding collateral worth a fraction of the outstanding debt, bad debt that socializes losses across all lenders. The mirror attack on the debt side has the same structure: an attacker manipulates the oracle to undervalue a borrow asset, drains far more of it than the collateral truly warrants at fair value, and exits before the price recovers — leaving the protocol with debt whose true value exceeds the collateral backing it.
```

Protection Mode prevents this by introducing a per-asset rolling spot-price window. When the current spot deviates beyond a configured threshold from that window, the asset's borrow-power calculation switches to a conservative dual-price scheme:

* **Collateral value** is computed at `min(spot, windowMin)` — caps borrow power at the recent window low so a pumped asset cannot be over-borrowed against.

> * **Debt value** is computed at `max(spot, windowMax)` — floors outstanding debt at the recent window high so a crashed borrow asset cannot be repaid cheaply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Debt value** is computed at `max(spot, windowMax)` — floors the valuation of debt at the recent window high so a crashed borrow asset cannot be over-borrowed at the manipulated low price.
```

2. **Window converged**: `(maxPrice − minPrice) / minPrice < resetThreshold`, where `resetThreshold` is configured below `triggerThreshold`.

When both conditions are satisfied, the off-chain monitor / keeper calls `exitProtectionMode(asset)` (or includes an `ExitProtectionMode` item inside `syncPriceBoundsAndProtections`) to clear the flag. Governance retains a fallback path.

#### Per-Asset Whitelist and Configuration

Protection Mode is opt-in per asset. Governance enables it by calling `setTokenConfig` (or the batch variant) on the DeviationBoundedOracle, which:

* Initializes the rolling window from the current spot.
* Stores the per-asset `cooldownPeriod`, `triggerThreshold`, and `resetThreshold`.
* Sets the bounded-pricing whitelist flag from the `enableBoundedPricing` argument — when `true` the asset participates in the Comptroller's bounded borrow-power path; when `false` the asset is initialized but the DBO short-circuits to spot until governance flips the flag with `setAssetBoundedPricingEnabled`.
* Sets the per-asset transient-cache flag from the `enableCaching` argument (configurable later via `setCachingEnabled`).

> VAI is rejected at config time and can never be whitelisted. Highly liquid assets (major stablecoins, blue-chip majors) are also intentionally not whitelisted: the manipulation surface there is not material, and the extra oracle writes and gas aren't worth it. Whitelisting can be toggled later with `setAssetBoundedPricingEnabled` (it cannot be turned off while protection is active).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VAI is hard-rejected at config time and can never be whitelisted. For all other assets, whether Protection Mode is enabled is a governance decision driven by each asset's liquidity profile and manipulation surface; it can be toggled later with `setAssetBoundedPricingEnabled` (it cannot be turned off while protection is active).
```

| Liquidation eligibility | spot | spot |
| Liquidation seize amount | spot | spot |

The Comptroller routes borrow-power price fetches through the DeviationBoundedOracle; the liquidation path is unchanged and continues to call the Resilient Oracle directly. Non-whitelisted markets always use spot.

### Effect on Existing Positions

Three consequences follow directly from the design and are worth stating explicitly:

1. **Liquidations are unaffected.** Eligibility and seize-amount calculations continue to use the Resilient Oracle's spot price exactly as today — no code path change, and liquidator incentives stay identical.
2. **Existing positions are not retroactively endangered.** Because liquidation eligibility is evaluated at spot, switching an asset into Protection Mode does not, by itself, push any user closer to liquidation. Bounded prices apply only to the borrow-power check, so an active position keeps its existing health factor at spot. What Protection Mode restricts is **new borrow capacity** — additional borrows and collateral withdrawals are evaluated against the conservative bounded prices, reducing the headroom for new actions until protection clears.

> 3. **Keeper failure or misbehavior cannot threaten existing positions either.** The keeper's on-chain write constraints are limited to `newMin ≤ spot ∧ newMin ≤ maxPrice` and `newMax ≥ spot ∧ newMax ≥ minPrice` — they prevent inverted windows but do not stop a keeper from pushing the window toward an extreme. So in principle a faulty or adversarial keeper could keep Protection Mode active longer than warranted. The worst-case effect is still confined to the borrow-power path — it can over-tighten the bounded prices and **block new borrows or collateral withdrawals**, but it cannot trigger a liquidation, change a seize amount, or otherwise alter an open position. Keeper risk is bounded to denial of new capacity, never harm to existing exposure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Keeper failure or misbehavior cannot threaten existing positions either.** The keeper's on-chain write constraints are limited to `newMin ≤ spot ∧ newMin ≤ maxPrice` and `newMax ≥ spot ∧ newMax ≥ minPrice` — they prevent inverted windows but do not stop a keeper from pushing the window toward an extreme. So in principle a faulty or adversarial keeper could push the window toward an extreme, either triggering Protection Mode unnecessarily or keeping it active longer than warranted. In either case the worst-case effect is still confined to the borrow-power path — it can over-tighten the bounded prices and **block new borrows or collateral withdrawals**, but it cannot trigger a liquidation, change a seize amount, or otherwise alter an open position. Keeper risk is bounded to denial of new capacity, never harm to existing exposure.
```
